---
title: "Presentation at the Chemometrics in Analytical Chemistry 2018 congress of my hyperspectral imaging precessing works"
published: true
permalink: CAC2018.html
date: 2018-06-25
tags: [Publication, Congress]
---

Presentation of hyperspectral imaging work in progress at the Chemometrics in Analytical Chemistry 2018 congress with two communications. One oral commucation "Fusion of multiresolution hyperspectral and fluorescence images for the analysis of sediment cores" and one poster "Micrometric mapping of total organic carbon in lake sediment cores combining fusion of multiresolution hyperspectral images and PLSR analysis".

Abstract 1:

For solids environmental samples, spectroscopic properties can be analyzed but their interpretation is difficult due to the lack of common referential. For the spectroscopic images, pixels are relatively spatially referenced but in most cases, each sensor has his own spatial resolution. The sample used in this work is the first 30cm of a sedimentary core from the Lake Le Bourget (Western Alps), characterized by a stratified area corresponding to last eutrophic conditions of the lake. The aim of this work is to combine four images, (1) two hyperspectral images (9x15cm²): VNIR (98 bands, pixel: 60μm) and SWIR (144 bands, pixel: 189μm), and (2) two fluorescence images (2x10cm²; sub-sample of the previous one) using excitation wavelengths of 266nm and 355nm (1024 bands each, pixel: 100μm). Each hyperspectral data can be resume with a structured grayscale image. With these, it is possible to calculate a micro-deformation model (digital image correlation) and registered them with the same spatial dimension. Applying ARSIS method [1], a pixel level data fusion model is created to fuse all the spectra in a unique spatial cube with the optimal resolution using wavelet spatial transform (decomposition in 4 images: details, vertical, horizontal and diagonal). The new cube can be used as a new instrument. The ARSIS method allows to create a correlation model between the wavelet functions for all the resolution images used. This correlation can be used to add spatial structures to the low spatial resolute data calculated with wavelet transform.

Abstract 2:

Sedimentary cores are used, thanks to their physical, chemical and biological properties, to infer past climate and environment. Sampling methods (millimetre or centimetre) and routine analysis are destructive and non-spatially resolved methods that consume time and material. The use of hyperspectral imaging makes it possible to have micrometric area in each point of the core. We use two hyperspectral cameras, the VNIR (spectral range: 400-1000nm, spatial resolution: 60μm) and the SWIR (spectral range: 1000-2500nm, spatial resolution: 189μm). Usually each camera is used separately. The goal of this work is to show the combination of sensor increase performance predictions. A pixel-level data fusion based on the ARSIS method [1] is applied to create a unique cube at the optimal resolution. This new cube can be used with a usual PLSR method to develop a model for the total organic carbon. A sediment core from the lake Le Bourget (Western Alps) has been tested (approximately 60cm long and 9cm width each). The results show an increase prediction performance rather than data used separately. In the unique cube, the selected wavelength (chlorophyll area (nm), C-H bonds ( nm) and O-H bonds ( nm)) corresponds to those selected by each sensor. Although the analyzes were performed on bulk samples (5 mm x 90 mm x 45 mm slices), the prediction model provides access to the mapping of the surface with a micrometric resolution (the 60μm pixel can be interpreted as relevant information).