---
layout: post
title: "Thesis"
date: 2019-11-27
categories: [Thesis]
---

Defence of my thesis untitled "Characterization of organic matters in solid phase organic by multispectral image processing and data mapping".

Keywords: chemometrics, hyperspectral image processing, organic matter, sediment, data fusion, spectroscopy

Abstract:

For now, the methods of characterization of the natural organic matter contained in the sedimentary cores require the destruction of the sample. Furthermore, these methods of analysis do not allow to obtain a speed of implementation and a resolution of information sufficient to be really exploitable for the paléoenvironnementales studies. To resolve this problem, the laboratory EDYTEM develops a multimodal bench of characterization (photo, fluorescence imaging, fluorescence induced by laser, hyperspectral spectrophotometry and Raman). The production of image n-D leads specific methodological developments in two directions: · the development of multilayers image processings to characterize objects studied in particular in term of granulomorphometry, of segmentation and of squelettisation sedimentary structures, · a chemometrics approach to allowing by the fusion of data and an multi-scale approach, to predict a fine characterization of analytical from the multispectral data. The calibration of these methodologies will be realized compared with reconstituted sediments (dopings, premixtures) by following adapted design of experiments. The validation will be made by using a collection of sedimentary cores already very studied for the follow-up of the dynamics of eutrophication / oligotrophisation of the Bourget Lake during the last century. In this context, this work will take place according to the following plan: · develop specific processings to the hyperspectral images · propose a method of fusion taking into account the indistinctness of the data managed towards a characterization of the various organic contents · validate the method by the application on real sediments and test models · demonstrate the applicability of this method on the problem of the eutrophication / oligotrophisation of the surfaces of continental waters for an end of retro-observation and diagnosis of the ecological state of these. This thesis subject can join only an interdisciplinary and integrated approach by the skills of both laboratories: EDYTEM for the instrumentation and the supply for multispectral collection data, the techniques of analyses of the organic matter, the constitution of reference samples and especially the skill in sciences of the environment and in sedimentology. LISTIC for the analysis of images, forms recognition, representation and fusion of the data.
